# spatial-patterns-of-forest-dynamics

 Forest dieback is often caused by natural disturbances, which play an important role in shaping forest ecosystems. They affect the structure of forest stands, and the dynamics of dieback is greater the more species-uniform the forest is. One such area is in the Babia Góra National Park, where gradations of the bark beetle contribute to large-scale dieback of spruce stands. The purpose of this study is to see if there is a relationship between spruce bark beetle dieback and factors such as the thickness of the tree trunk, the direction of exposure of the gap edge at which the spruce trees are located, the proximity of trees that died in previous years, and the amount of solar radiation reaching the ground where the trees are located. The work also aims to see whether spruce trees die off in clusters. The distribution of live and dead spruce trees in relation to stand gaps, their diameter, the amount of solar radiation reaching the ground surface, clustering, and the distance to the nearest dead tree that died in the previous year were analyzed in a fragment of a subalpine spruce stand of 14.4 hectares. The study area is located in the subalpine forest within the Babia Góra National Park. It was found that spruce trees with higher stem thickness were not significantly more vulnerable to attack by the bark beetle. In addition, it was shown that the amount of solar radiation reaching spruce locations does not play a significant role in the death of trees. However, a tendency toward clustered dieback of spruce trees, more frequent dieback of trees in the neighborhood of spruce trees that died in previous years, and dieback of trees near the edges of south-facing stand gaps was shown, but only during the period covered by the high intensity of stand dieback. 
